DOCS-3699, DOCS-2540: Add module lifecycle and dependencies guidance (#4156)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/get-started/other-hardware/_index.md

{{% /alert %}}

{{< expand "How and where do modules run?" >}}
Modules run on your machine, alongside `viam-server` as separate processes, communicating with `viam-server` over UNIX sockets.

[`viam-server` manages](/operate/reference/viam-server/) the dependencies, start-up, reconfiguration, [data management](/data-ai/capture-data/capture-sync/), and shutdown behavior of your modular resource.

The lifecycle of a module and the resources it provides is as follows:

1. `viam-server` starts, and if it is connected to the internet, it checks for configuration updates.
1. `viam-server` starts any configured modules.
1. When a module initializes, it registers its model or models and associated [APIs](/dev/reference/apis/) with `viam-server`, making the models available for use.

> 1. For each modular resource configured on the machine, `viam-server` uses the resource's `validate` function and the `depends_on` field in the resource configuration to determine the dependencies of the resource.

Author: Yeah...I figured since the work hasn't started on implementing it it makes sense to try and get this merged with what is true now. Any idea on timeline for this change though?

1. If a dependency is not already running, `viam-server` starts it before starting the resource.
   If a dependency is not found or fails to start, `viam-server` will not start the resource that depends on it.

> 1. `viam-server` builds the resource based on its resource configuration.
> 1. If configuration fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the reconfigure function, `viam-server` attempts to reconfigure the resource.

Author: ```suggestion
1. `viam-server` calls the resource's constructor to build the resource based on its configuration.
   Typically, the constructor calls the reconfigure function.
1. If configuration fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the reconfigure or constructor functions, `viam-server` attempts to reconfigure the resource.
```
I realized we got the following question which I want to make sure this lifecycle explanation answers: 
"if constructor returns an error, will the resource manager try again repeatedly to register the camera by re-calling constructor?"
What's a good way to answer this @michaellee1019 ?

Reviewer: the resource manager will try repeatedly if the constructor errors, yes

1. The modular resource is ready to use.
1. If at any point the user changes the configuration of the machine, `viam-server` reconfigures the affected resources within 15 seconds.

> 1. If a resource crashes, `viam-server` attempts to rebuild it.

Author: Okay I'll delete this!
```suggestion
```

1. When `viam-server` shuts down, it attempts to stop all running modules.

>    If a module fails to shut down within 90 seconds, `viam-server` will forcefully kill it after 15 seconds.

Reviewer: The SIGTERMs are on a different timer, they are only triggered when we actually get to the clean module shutdown phase.
SIGKILLs are triggered after 90s from when the restart/shutdown is started, and the SIGTERMS can happen at any time between the shutdown is started and 90s

>    If a module fails to shut down within 90 seconds, `viam-server` will forcefully kill it after 15 seconds.

Reviewer 2: Ah I forgot about those `SIGKILL`s thanks @cheukt. So, yeah, slightly complicated "killing" logic (because we can SIGKILL a module due to it taking 90s since `viam-server` started shutdown _or_ it taking 30s since `viam-server` tried to start shutting down a single module, right?)

>    If a module fails to shut down within 90 seconds, `viam-server` will forcefully kill it after 15 seconds.

Reviewer: ya, you're right about that - I forgot about the SIGKILL after 30s from the viam-server trying to shutdown a module.

>    If a module fails to shut down within 90 seconds, `viam-server` will forcefully kill it after 15 seconds.

Author: So, this?
```suggestion
   When `viam-server` shuts down, it first shuts down all modules and kills them if they fail to shut down within 90 seconds.
   If `viam-server` attempts to shut down an individual module (for example due to a user disabling a module) and the module does not shut down within 30 seconds, `viam-server` kills the module.
```

>    If a module fails to shut down within 90 seconds, `viam-server` will forcefully kill it after 15 seconds.

Author: Benji okay'ed this^ via Slack

The lifecycle of a module and the resources it provides is as follows:

1. `viam-server` starts, and if it is connected to the internet, it checks for configuration updates.
1. `viam-server` starts any configured modules.
1. When a module initializes, it registers its model or models and associated [APIs](/dev/reference/apis/) with `viam-server`, making the models available for use.
1. For each modular resource configured on the machine, `viam-server` uses the resource's `validate` function and the `depends_on` field in the resource configuration to determine the dependencies of the resource.
1. If a dependency is not already running, `viam-server` starts it before starting the resource.
   If a dependency is not found or fails to start, `viam-server` will not start the resource that depends on it.
1. `viam-server` calls the resource's constructor to build the resource based on its configuration.
   Typically, the constructor calls the reconfigure function.
1. If configuration fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the reconfigure or constructor functions, `viam-server` attempts to reconfigure the resource.

> 1. The modular resource is ready to use.

Reviewer 3: This should also cover the failure scenario.  How often does it retry? What happens if it fails? Otherwise it's a bit odd to go from here to the next step. 
What makes it ready to use? If reconfigure succeeds? Can we be more specific?

Author: @benjirewis If reconfiguration happens within 15 seconds, does that also mean that initial configuration is retried every 15 seconds until it times out?
```suggestion
1. If configuration fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the reconfigure or constructor functions, `viam-server` attempts to reconfigure the resource every 15 seconds.
   If the module exceeds the [configured timeout limits](/operate/reference/module-configuration/#environment-variables) (default 5 minutes to start up and 1 minute to reconfigure), `viam-server` logs an [error](/dev/tools/common-errors/#timed-out-waiting-for-module).
1. Once the modular resource has started up and configured, it is available for use.
```

Reviewer 3: mentioning the env variables is a good idea

Reviewer 2: > @benjirewis If reconfiguration happens within 15 seconds, does that also mean that initial configuration is retried every 15 seconds until it times out?

So we have a ticker that checks for "unconfigured" resources (never constructed) every _5_ seconds. We'll try to construct a not-yet-successfully-constructed modular resource every _5_ seconds as long as `viam-server` and the module are alive and the resource is not successfully constructing. Same thing goes for reconfigure and a not-yet-successfully-reconfigured modular resource.

Author: Am I erroneously conflating construction and reconfiguration? I've thought of them as conjoined since the constructor calls reconfigure right? Should the wording of the suggestion above change @benjirewis ?

Reviewer 2: Yeah if you want to be super pedantic it would be:
```
If construction fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the modular resource's constructor, `viam-server` attempts to construct the resource every 5 seconds.

Similarly, if reconfiguration fails due to a validation failure or an exception thrown by the modular resource's reconfigure method, `viam-server` attempts to reconfigure the resource every 5 seconds.
```

1. If at any point the user changes the configuration of the machine, `viam-server` reconfigures the affected resources within 15 seconds.

> 1. When `viam-server` shuts down, it attempts to stop all running modules.

Reviewer 3: attempts? I mean it does stop them regardless. It attempts to shut them down gracefully and otherwise just kills them

Author: Maybe this will make more sense if I remove this sentence since the next sentence says this.

> 1. When `viam-server` shuts down, it attempts to stop all running modules.
>    If `viam-server` attempts to shut down an individual module (for example due to a user disabling a module) and the module does not shut down within 30 seconds, `viam-server` kills the module.

Author: ```suggestion
1. If `viam-server` attempts to shut down an individual module (for example due to a user disabling a module) and the module does not shut down within 30 seconds, `viam-server` kills the module.
```

> 1. When `viam-server` shuts down, it first shuts down all modules and kills them if they fail to shut down within 90 seconds.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused how the 30 and 90 seconds interact. If I have 3 modules that each take 30 seconds then any modules after that would just be killed?

Author: Deleted a sentence that was essentially duplicated. Does it make more sense now? I can also tweak this.

My understanding is that `viam-server` tries to close all modules simultaneously as soon as `viam-server` is told to shut down. So the number of modules shouldn't matter. I know dependencies influence order of startup but do they influence order of shutdown @benjirewis ?
```suggestion
1. When `viam-server` shuts down, it first attempts to shut down all modules, and kills them if they fail to shut down within 90 seconds.
```

Author: I believe 30s is for when viam-server is only shutting down an individual module, not shutting down all of viam-server. But when viam-server starts shutting itself down, there's a 90s opportunity for modules to shut down instead of only 30s. https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/pull/4156/files/bb8a64404d0266bc8f8f33595a08fccb7ba769a2#r2019210281

> So, yeah, slightly complicated "killing" logic (because we can SIGKILL a module due to it taking 90s since viam-server started shutdown or it taking 30s since viam-server tried to start shutting down a single module, right?)

Reviewer 2: The current phrasing you have is correct.

> My understanding is that viam-server tries to close all modules simultaneously as soon as viam-server is told to shut down. So the number of modules shouldn't matter. I know dependencies influence order of startup but do they influence order of shutdown @benjirewis ?

`viam-server` does _not_ close all modules simultaneously. It does it one by one (sequentially) in a somewhat random order. Dependencies do not influence order of shutdown of resources or modules in any way.

> I'm confused how the 30 and 90 seconds interact. If I have 3 modules that each take 30 seconds then any modules after that would just be killed?

Correct. If `viam-server` attempted to shut down three modules and all three took >= 30s each to shutdown, all three would be shutdown by a SIGKILL. All modules after those three would _also_ be shutdown by a SIGKILL and then `viam-server` would exit.

Reviewer 2: That looks great to me!
